---
title: Ascon-AEAD128 for JOSE and COSE
# abbrev: 
docname: draft-ochkas-cose-ascon-01
date: 2025-01-21
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
# workgroup:  
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: D. Ochkas
    name: Dmytro Ochkas
    organization: IMT Atlantique
    email: dmytro.ochkas@imt-atlantique.fr
 -
    ins: H. Le Bouder
    name: Hélène Le Bouder
    organization: IMT Atlantique
    email: helene.le-bouder@imt-atlantique.fr
 -
    ins: A. Pelov
    name: Alexander Pelov
    organization: IMT Atlantique
    email: alexander.pelov@imt-atlantique.fr

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC7516:
  RFC7517:
  RFC7518:
  RFC8174:
  RFC9052:
  RFC9053:
  IANA.cose:
  IANA.jose:

informative:
  asconv1.2-caesar:
    title: Ascon v1.2, Submission to Round 3 of the CAESAR competition
    target: https://competitions.cr.yp.to/round3/asconv12.pdf
    author:
      -
        name: Christoph Dobraunig
      -
        name: Maria Eichlseder
      -
        name: Florian Mendel
      -
        name: Martin Schläffer
    date: 2016
  asconv1.2-nist:
    title: Ascon v1.2, Submission to Final Round of the NIST Lightweight Cryptography project
    target: https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/lightweight-cryptography/documents/finalist-round/updated-spec-doc/ascon-spec-final.pdf
    author:
      -
        name: Christoph Dobraunig
      -
        name: Maria Eichlseder
      -
        name: Florian Mendel
      -
        name: Martin Schläffer
    date: 2021
  NIST.SP.800-232:
    title: Ascon-Based Lightweight Cryptography Standards for Constrained Devices
    target: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-232.ipd
    author:
      -
        name: Meltem Sönmez Turan
      -
        name: Kerry A. McKay
      -
        name: Jinkeon Kang
      -
        name: John Kelsey
    date: 2024
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.6028/NIST.SP.800-232


--- abstract

This document describes JSON Object Signing and Encryption (JOSE) and
CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE) serializations with Ascon which
received a lot of attention in the area of lightweight cryptography.

In 2019, as a part of CAESAR competition, Ascon-128 and Ascon-128a were
selected as the first choice for the lightweight authenticated encryption [asconv1.2-caesar].
After, in 2023, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) selected
Ascon family of cryptographic algorithms to be the standard for lightweight
cryptography [asconv1.2-nist]. This recognition makes it particularly interesting to use Ascon with
COSE and JOSE structures.

This document does not define any new cryptography, only
serializations of existing cryptographic systems described in
{{NIST.SP.800-232}}.

--- middle

Introduction        {#intro}
============

Constrained networks such as Internet of Things (IoT) networks most of the
time are characterized by the limited computational power and autonomy.
In this context, the choice of suitable cryptographic algorithms that provide 
robust security without consuming large amount of resources is essential.
As a winner of the lightweight cryptography standardization process conducted by
NIST, Ascon family of cryptographic algorithms is a perfect candidate for
the described situation.

Ascon-Based Lightweight Cryptography Standards for Constrained Devices
{{NIST.SP.800-232}} introduces a suite of algorithms to provide Authenticated
Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD), a hash function, and two eXtendable
Output Functions (XOFs).

This document focuses on the AEAD part of Ascon standard. It enables the
usage of Ascon-AEAD128 with JOSE and COSE for content encryption.


Terminology  {#need}
===========

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
BCP 14 {{RFC2119}} {{RFC8174}} when, and only when, they appear in all
capitals, as shown here.


Ascon algorithms  {#algos}
================

In the scope of this document, only the authenticated encryption Ascon
is allowed for. Ascon's encryption and decryption algorithms are parametrized
by the key length k, the rate r, and the internal round numbers a and b.
{{NIST.SP.800-232}} specifies the Ascon-AEAD128 algorithm with the following parameters:

|Key Length, k|Rate, r|Outer permutation rounds, a|Inner permutation rounds, b|
|128|128|12|8|
{: #asconaeadparams title="Ascon-AEAD128 parameters"}

COSE encryption and decryption with Ascon-AEAD128 is done in accordance with Section 5.3 of {{RFC9052}}.

Thus, this document requests the registration of the Ascon-AEAD128 algorithm in {{IANA.cose}}:

|Name|alg|Description|
|Ascon-AEAD128|TBD (requested assignment 35)|CBOR Object Encryption Algorithm for Ascon-AEAD128|
{: #cosealgos title="COSE Algorithms for Ascon"}

In COSE, keys may be obtained from either a key structure or a recipient structure {{RFC9052}}.

When using a COSE key for this algorithm, the following checks are made:

  * The "kty" field MUST be present, and it MUST be "Symmetric".

  * If the "alg" field is present, it MUST match the Ascon-AEAD128 algorithm being used.

  * If the "key_ops" field is present, it MUST include "encrypt" when encrypting.

  * If the "key_ops" field is present, it MUST include "decrypt" when decrypting.


Also, this document requests the registration of the Ascon-AEAD128 algorithm in {{IANA.jose}}: 

|Name|enc|Description|
|Ascon-AEAD128|Ascon-AEAD128|JSON Object Encryption Algorithm for Ascon-AEAD128|
{: #josealgos title="JOSE Algorithms for Ascon"}

Implementations that are encrypting or decrypting MUST validate that the key type, key length,
and algorithm are correct and appropriate for the entities involved.

IV Header Parameter   {#iv}
===================

Unlike some common AEAD algorithms, Ascon distinguishes between the notion
of initialization vector (IV) and nonce (N). While N is the input argument
for the Ascon encryption/decryption functions, IV is the constant defined
for each Ascon algorithm and is based on its parameters.

However, {{IANA.cose}} does not define a separate header parameter to specify Nonce.
Thus, in COSE, whenever Full Initialization Vector Header Parameter (Name: IV,
Label: 5) or Partial Initialization Vector Header Parameter (Name: Partial IV, Label: 6) is
specified it MUST refer to the N argument of the corresponding Ascon function.

On the other hand, JSON Web Signature and Encryption Header Parameters registry
at {{IANA.jose}} defines both Nonce Header Parameter ("nonce") and Initialization
Vector Header Parameter ("iv"). However, the "nonce" parameter is intended to be used
only for signatures. That is, in JOSE, "iv" parameters MUST refer to the N argument
of the corresponding Ascon function. There SHOULD NOT be "nonce" parameters specified
while using Ascon for content encryption. In case "nonce" parameter is specified it MUST be ignored.


Security Considerations  {#security}
=======================

The security considerations for {{RFC7516}}, {{RFC7517}} and {{RFC9053}} apply to
this specification as well. 

According to the most recent security analysis publications, Ascon did not show any
security vulnerabilities so far and the best attacks target the initialization of Ascon
reduced to 7 (out of 12) rounds, concluding that Ascon has a security margin of 5 rounds
(42 % of the 12 rounds).

Refer to the Ascon's List of Published Analysis section at [asconv1.2-nist] for more details.

IANA Considerations  {#iana}
===================

Additions to Existing Registries
--------------------------------

### New COSE Algorithms ###

IANA is requested to add the following entries to the COSE Algorithms
Registry. The following completed registration templates are
provided as described in {{RFC9052}} and {{RFC9053}}.

#### Ascon-AEAD128 for COSE ####

*  Name: Ascon-AEAD128

*  Value: TBD (requested assignment 35)

*  Description: CBOR Object Encryption Algorithm with Ascon-AEAD128

*  Capabilities: [kty]

*  Reference: FIPS XXX

*  Recommended: Yes

### New JOSE Algorithms ###

IANA is requested to add the following entries to the JSON Web
Signature and Encryption Algorithms Registry. The following
completed registration templates are provided as described in
{{RFC7518}}.

#### Ascon-AEAD128 for JOSE ####

*  Algorithm Name: Ascon-AEAD128

*  Algorithm Description: Ascon-AEAD128 as described in FIPS XXX.

*  Algorithm Usage Location(s): enc

*  JOSE Implementation Requirements: Optional

*  Change Controller: IESG

*  Specification Document(s): FIPS XXX

*  Algorithm Analysis Documents(s): n/a


--- back

Examples  {#xmp}
========

This appendix provides some examples of various Ascon-AEAD128 Encryptions with COSE and JOSE

COSE
----

### Simple Ascon-AEAD128 Encryption ###

~~~~~~~~~~
{
  "plaintext": "546869732069732074686520636f6e74656e742e",
  "nonce": "00000000000000000000000000000000",
  "AAD": "8367456E637279707443A1010140",
  "CEK": "849B57219DAE48DE646D07DBB533566E",
  "Encrypt0": "d08344a1011823a1055000000000000000000000000000000000582436ba4da1fa787205e5fff06fd4b645c637c02b505046fb242984864e1f6875c4ae5c9557",
  "Encrypt0_diag": "16([h'A1011823', {5: h'00000000000000000000000000000000'}, h'36BA4DA1FA787205E5FFF06FD4B645C637C02B505046FB242984864E1F6875C4AE5C9557'])"  
}
~~~~~~~~~~

### Direct Ascon-AEAD128 Encryption with HKDF-SHA-256 ###

~~~~~~~~~~
{
  "plaintext": "546869732069732074686520636f6e74656e742e",
  "nonce": "00000000000000000000000000000000",
  "AAD": "8367456E637279707443A1010140",
  "CEK": "849B57219DAE48DE646D07DBB533566E",
  "key": {
    "kid": "6F75722D736563726574",
    "kty": "Symmetric"
  },
  "salt": "61616262636364646565666667676868",
  "Encrypt": "d8608444a1011823a105500000000000000000000000000000000058247b09f4de6d93b6779163d978efa2d7eaac699acad60a6a9779168b5569d57ef92d3102bf818343a10129a2044a6f75722d73656372657433506161626263636464656566666767686840",
  "Encrypt_diag": "96([h'A1011823', {5: h'00000000000000000000000000000000'}, h'7B09F4DE6D93B6779163D978EFA2D7EAAC699ACAD60A6A9779168B5569D57EF92D3102BF', [[h'A10129', {4: h'6F75722D736563726574', -20: h'61616262636364646565666667676868'}, h'']]])"
}
~~~~~~~~~~

JOSE
----

### Direct Compact JWE structure using Ascon-AEAD128 ### 

~~~~~~~~~~
{
  "plaintext": "546869732069732074686520636f6e74656e742e",
  "nonce": "00000000000000000000000000000000",
  "protected": {
    "alg":"dir",
    "enc":"Ascon-AEAD128"
  },
  "CEK": "849B57219DAE48DE646D07DBB533566E",
  "jwe": "eyJhbGciOiJkaXIiLCJlbmMiOiJBc2Nvbi1BRUFEMTI4In0..AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA.XjkRZmV9Dy0lpQp_4yUYIY1CGN8.zUqKLKMQnqjXFY258aNMgw"
}


~~~~~~~~~~
